cute animals come in all shapes and
sizes but why are some so big and why
some so small well it's all to do with
where they live what they eat and their
overall environment I'm Hanna Sifl and
in this episode we're going to be taking
a look at one of the smallest mammal to
walk our planet and definitely one of
the spike years from the African plains
to a quintessentially English garden our
next cute animal is certainly
unmistakable the hedgehog these brown
spiky mammals with their small beady
eyes and adorable button noses are
undeniably lovable being the only animal
with spikes found in the UK they are
mostly nocturnal in secretive creatures
but can be found in an array of habitats
from woodlands in orchards to man-made
gardens and they are succinctly adorable
so we have come to Cuba here in cool and
we're visiting prickles & poor's
hedgehog rescue center as we want to get
some shots of hedgehogs for this episode
but we've also heard that they might be
having their first swimming lesson so
let's go and take a look hello thanks
for having us thank you right um
hedgehogs swimming paddling pool is
ready is it oh wow
Katy who you are busy aren't you my
goodness so how many rescues if you had
come in lately mind we've made about 500
a year I think we might exceed that a
bit this year because that's that's the
busy summer we've ever had especially
with the hot loads so you can see here
all that these are other little swans
and with our babies as well yeah
[Music]
they are famous for having the ability
to curl up into a ball when they feel
threatened and they become completely
protected with their Shield of spines
hedgehogs also have a tail which is
about five centimetres long but this is
always tucked away underneath it's by
Kiko an average Hedgehog has around
7,000 spines tipped with yellow these
spines are in fact modified hollow hairs
that around 2 to 3 centimeters long and
cover their entire bodies apart from
their furry faces and underside he was
meant to be going for a release but as
that leg still isn't quite strong so he
is now so we can get him walking first
so you can see but he's he's walking on
the top of the foot so he's not sort of
using that back leg properly we see it
in quite a lot of the juveniles where
it's probably something nutritional from
when there was likely younger or it
could be something to the ligaments and
tendons loose but we've had huge success
with them doing hi share opee so we have
a paddling pool and they go swimming
their long snout is used to sniff out
tasty morsels such as insects snails
slugs and worms which they can be found
snuffling for around the garden
especially at night
[Music]
in fact hedgehogs can travel up to 2
kilometers in search of food each night
and can be pretty nifty when they need
to they are excellent at running
climbing and even swimming would they
swim in the wild yes so the only so we
get quite a lot that come in trapped in
ponds so a bit like our paddling pool
it's got quite a plastic lip on the edge
and they can't Scrabble out over it but
natural rivers ponds things with sides
where they can actually sort of Scrabble
out of they do really well but if we
just see if we can get her to walk him
to walk first we can see what and this
is what you do before you release them
you know get that back leg there and
we're going on the top of the foot okay
so the other foot is going flat and
we're going on the top of that foot so
in the water they can't curl up as much
which means it's a lot easier to
manipulate the legs massage stimulate
blood flow and then hold it in the right
position and almost try and correct it
so we're going to go really gradually
and I should point out this water is
lovely and warm the idea is it's nice
and warm to help with the muscles
because there's no point in putting them
in cold water that's not really gonna
help the muscles this is effectively the
shallow end but if you look at those
back feet you can see that there's not
the flexion in the foot so what we're
going to do is as we swim we find that
it will start coming but I'm just going
to massage that leg and try and get a
bit of flexion in that foot yep and get
the foot in the right position you can
already see there's a bit more flexion
in it yeah and it's still twisted but
actually there's flexion in the foot and
the change can come so quickly but you
can sort of see the difference in both
feet amazing from when he first went in
how the difference in that foot there
especially yeah you can see it's
actually great movement
and oh well done sweep your first swing
Hey it's adorable look at his face well
done sweep you've done really well
first lesson completed so we've probably
got about a week or so swimming we'll
reassess you might have a bit more after
that but hopefully not too long and
we'll be able to get back out to the
wild during the winter months
hedgehogs will hibernate from November
to March and through the autumn they
will build up their fat reserves then
find a nice safe place to use as a
winter nest these nests are essential
for their survival when it gets cold and
they will collect leaves grass and straw
to stash away under log piles and
hedgerows this is why in autumn you
should always check the garden bonfire
before lighting as you may just have a
little Hedgehog nest inside
[Music]
[Applause]